Notes on Parameter Tuning

Parameter tuning is a dark art in machine learning, the optimal parameters of a model can depend on many scenarios. So it is impossible to create a comprehensive guide for doing so.

This document tries to provide some guideline for parameters in XGBoost.
Understanding Bias-Variance Tradeoff

If you take a machine learning or statistics course, this is likely to be one of the most important concepts. When we allow the model to get more complicated (e.g. more depth), the model has better ability to fit the training data, resulting in a less biased model. However, such complicated model requires more data to fit.

Most of parameters in XGBoost are about bias variance tradeoff. The best model should trade the model complexity with its predictive power carefully. Parameters Documentation will tell you whether each parameter will make the model more conservative or not. This can be used to help you turn the knob between complicated model and simple model.
Control Overfitting

When you observe high training accuracy, but low test accuracy, it is likely that you encountered overfitting problem.
Algorithm
1) Create a set sptSet (shortest path tree set) that keeps track of vertices included in shortest path tree, i.e., whose minimum distance from source is calculated and finalized. Initially, this set is empty.
2) Assign a distance value to all vertices in the input graph. Initialize all distance values as INFINITE. Assign distance value as 0 for the source vertex so that it is picked first.
3) While sptSet doesn’t include all vertices
….a) Pick a vertex u which is not there in sptSet and has minimum distance value.
….b) Include u to sptSet.
….c) Update distance value of all adjacent vertices of u. To update the distance values, iterate through all adjacent vertices. For every adjacent vertex v, if sum of distance value of u (from source) and weight of edge u-v, is less than the distance value of v, then update the distance value of v.

There are in general two ways that you can control overfitting in XGBoost:

    The first way is to directly control model complexity.

        This includes max_depth, min_child_weight and gamma.

    The second way is to add randomness to make training robust to noise.

        This includes subsample and colsample_bytree.

        You can also reduce stepsize eta. Remember to increase num_round when you do so.

